It's imperative at this stage that we step away from talking
specifically about security risk management for just a moment,
and think about the overall risk management context.
Many organizations rely on what's described as
the three lines of defense model for managing risk.
Even if that's not formally, even if they don't know it.
The three lines of defense model really consists of control or risk owners;
these are the system owners,
or the individuals that are actually responsible for addressing the risk.
Then we have risk managers;
these are the internal risk assessors who identify risk and perform risk assessment.
This is primarily where we're focusing our time,
this is where the GRC role would fit as part of this process.
Then finally, you have internal audit;
they're the folks that provide oversight over
the entire risk management process and the outcomes.
As I said, most organizations have some version of this structure in place already.
At a high level, the risk management frameworks we discussed
earlier tend to operate at the second and third lines of defense,
being used as mechanisms to guide risk management,
the structure, and the process.
The first line of defense really being more concerned by the operation
of business processes and then the implementation of risk mitigating controls.
The bridge between our second line of defense and our first line are risk assessments.
Now, if you're tracking this against the nist RMS,
this would roughly relate to task R1;
this is where we're rooting out our risks.
Risk assessments are performed by risk managers like
GRC professionals measuring systems against potential risk.
The risks being the risk statements that we talked about much earlier.
The risk assessments themselves operate by placing
a risk statement in the context of a particular business process,
a system, or an organization.
Then making an informed decision about the likelihood and the impact of the risk.
Weighing any additional controls that might actually help reduce that risk,
and then finally, creating a residual risk rating.
For instance, let's look at an example of antivirus software.
We have a risk statement that anti-virus systems are not updated,
which may allow access to sensitive data.
During our assessment, we find that antivirus software
isn't installed on a number of servers that contain highly sensitive information.
Our job is to assess how likely it is that risk could be exploited,
what the impact might be,
and then finally reached an overall risk score.
Remember that risk is equal to the likelihood times impact,
so in this case,
we've concluded that the risk is high.